---
title: FAQ
---

## General

### Where did the name "proto" come from?

We wanted to keep with the space theme, and spent quite some time digging through Wikipedia and
ultimately landed on the page for [protostar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protostar) (this is why
our logo's a star). We really liked the definition of protostar, as it basically means "the
beginning phase of a star". Even the the prefix proto means "first" or "earliest form of".

This was great as that's the impression we had in mind for our tool. proto is the first piece
required for setting up your developer environment. The toolchain is the first layer in the
foundation.

From an aesthetic standpoint, proto's typography works well with moon and moonbase, as most of the
letters are circle shaped. Double points for proto having two o's like the other products!

### Are you worried about confusion with other tools like protobufs?

Nah.

### What is a tool?

A tool in the context of proto is either a language, dependency/package manager (typically for a
language), or third-party CLI. The tool is something that can be downloaded and installed _by
version_ onto a machine.

Furthermore, a tool should have a primary executable file that can be executed with `proto run` or
through proto's shims. Additionally, a tool can also provide secondary executable files. For
example, `npm` (the primary) also provides `npx` and `node-gyp` (secondaries).

### What is a plugin?

A plugin is a WASM (or TOML) file for a tool.

The terms tool and plugin are often used interchangeably, but plugin primarily refers to the WASM
portion of a tool, while tool refers to the entire package: metadata, business logic, branding, so
on an so forth.

### Will you support more languages?

Yes! We'd love to support as many as possible, and if you'd like to help, join our Discord
community! Feel free to create a [plugin](./plugins) in the mean time.

### Will you support other kinds of tools?

No, we will only support languages, dependency managers, and CLIs, which should be enough. However,
you can create a [plugin](./plugins) to support other kinds of tools.

### Will you support "build from source"?

In the future we have plans to support building from source. For the time being, proto is built
around pre-built archives for easier portability.

### How can I install a global package for a language?

You can install a global with the [`proto install-global`](./commands/install-global) command. Most
languages install a global to a shared location regardless of the language's version (Deno is
`~/.deno/bin`, Rust is `~/.cargo/bin`, etc), so globals can also be installed _outside_ of proto
using language specific commands.

The exception to this is Node.js (and npm, pnpm, yarn). Each of these tools install global packages
_differently_, and some are tied to the parent tools version. So if you install a new language
version, you lose your global packages. We suggest using `proto install-global` for all Node.js
packages, which installs everything to a shared location, `~/.proto/tools/node/globals/bin`. You'll
also need to manually add these global directories to your `PATH`.

However, if you'd prefer to use the native non-proto workflow, you can disable the globals intercept
using the [`tools.node.intercept-globals` setting](./config#settings).

### How to run a canary release after installing it?

Once a tool has been installed with `--canary`, the canary version can be explicitly referenced
using our [version detection rules](./detection). The easiest approach is to prefix the shim with an
environment variable:

```shell
$ PROTO_BUN_VERSION=canary bun ./index.ts
```

Or to explicitly configure the version in [`.prototools`](./config):

```toml
bun = "canary"
```

### OS is unable to find an installed binary, how to resolve?

To start, ensure that proto's shim and binary directories are listed first on `PATH`, and takes
precedence over other binaries of the same name that may collide.

Secondly, proto is powered through shims, which means on Windows, we do not provide `.exe` binaries
(for shims), and instead use `.cmd`. If you're attempting to run a script that uses a hard-coded
binary name like `node.exe`, you'll need to do one of the following:

- Remove the trailing `.exe` and simply run `node` instead. Windows will use the `PATHEXT`
  environment variable to find the appropriate extension, which includes `.cmd` by default.
- Ensure `~/.proto/bin` is in your `PATH`. If a shim cannot be found, the original binary will be
  used instead.
